docs: document development process (#280)
elastic/golang-crossbuild: README.md

[![Build Status](https://beats-ci.elastic.co/buildStatus/icon?job=golang-crossbuild%2Fgolang-crossbuild-mbp%2Fmain)](https://beats-ci.elastic.co/job/golang-crossbuild/job/golang-crossbuild-mbp/job/main/)

# golang-crossbuild Docker images

This repository contains Dockerfiles for cross building Go binaries for various platforms.
The aim is to provide a simple way to build Go binaries for multiple platforms without having to install and configure cross compilers on your host machine.

> To do that the project provide a set of Docker images that can be used to build Go binaries for the following platforms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that the project provides a set of Docker images that can be used to build Go binaries for the following platforms:
```

* linux/amd64
* linux/arm
* linux/armel
* linux/armhf
* linux/arm64
* linux/mips
* linux/mipsle
* linux/mips64
* linux/ppc64
* linux/ppc64le
* linux/s390x
* windows/amd64
* darwin/amd64
* darwin/arm64

The Docker images are based on Debian and the cross compilers are installed using the crossbuild-essential package.

> Each architecture have its own folder with the files needed to build the Docker image for that architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each architecture has its own folder with the files needed to build the Docker image for that architecture.
```

> Each architecture has its own Dockerfile to builld a Docker image for that architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each architecture has its own Dockerfile to build a Docker image for that architecture.
```

> Each architecture Dockerfile install the crossbuild-essential package for that architecture and the libraries needed to build our binaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each architecture Dockerfile installs the crossbuild-essential package for that architecture and the libraries needed to build our binaries.
```

These Dockerfiles are generated files from `Dockerfile.tmpl` template file that is in the architectures folder.
This template is processed using a Makefile that is in the architectures folder.
Each architecture folder has a `roofs` folder that contains the files that will be copied to the Docker image in the root folder.
In `rootfs` we have the `compolers.yml` file that contains the list of compilers that will be installed in the Docker image.
Each Docker image has a basic compilation test that is executed when the image is built. This test uses `rootfs/helloworld.c` file to compile a simple C program and verify the architecture of the result binary.
The compiler used to build the binaries is LLVM.
Some of the Docker images are build for the amd64 and arm64 architectures, this allow to run the Docker images in linux/amd64, linux/arm64, darwin/amd64, and darwin/arm64. This is done using the `.ci/scripts/buildx.sh` command.

> The Docker images are tagger using the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Docker images are tagged using the following format:
```

* `docker.elastic.co/beats-dev/golang-crossbuild:<go-version>-<arch>-<debian-version>`

> For the latest version of the images based on the latest Debian and Go versions, the following tags are also used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the latest version of the images based on the latest Debian and Go versions, the following tag is also used:
```

**Debian9** uses `glibc 2.24`.
**Debian10** uses `glibc 2.28`.

## Makefiles

There are several Makefiles in the profect across the different folders.
The Makefile in the root folder is used to build the Docker images for the different architectures,

> it triggers the build of all dockerimages for all architectures and Devian versions supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it triggers the build of all Docker images for all architectures and Debian versions supported.
```

The file `go/Makefile.common` is the default Makefile used to build the Docker images for the different architectures.
There is additional Makefile for each Debian version that is used to build the Docker images for that Debian version.

* `go/Makefile.debian7`
* `go/Makefile.debian8`
* `go/Makefile.debian9`
* `go/Makefile.debian10`
* `go/Makefile.debian11`

No all architectures are supported in all Debian versions, so the Makefile for each Debian version will only build the Docker images for the architectures that are supported in that Debian version.

> On the Makefiles threre are some variables to define the name of the Docker image, the version of the Docker image, the Debian version, and the suffix to use in the tag of the Docker image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the Makefiles there are some variables to define the name of the Docker image, the version of the Docker image, the Debian version, and the suffix to use in the tag of the Docker image.
```

```make
NAME           := golang-crossbuild
VERSION        := 1.20.2
DEBIAN_VERSION ?= 9
SUFFIX         := -$(shell basename $(CURDIR))
TAG_EXTENSION  ?=

export DEBIAN_VERSION TAG_EXTENSION

DOCKER_CMD := docker build
```

In this example the name of the Docker image is `golang-crossbuild`, the go version is `1.20.2` that is uses as part of the tag, the Debian version is `9`, the suffix is `-debian9`, and the tag extension is empty. Also the `DOCKER_CMD` variable is used to define the command to use to build the Docker image, in this case `docker build`.

The tag is build using the following format:

```make
TAG := $(REPOSITORY)/$(NAME):$(VERSION)$(SUFFIX)$(TAG_EXTENSION)
```

The common variables to all the Makefiles are defined at `Makefile.common` file.

To more information about the supported architextures and the correlation with comercial names,
you can check the [Debian Supported Architectures](https://wiki.debian.org/SupportedArchitectures) page.

> To make and push the Docker images for all the architectures and defaulr Debian version, you can run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make and push the Docker images for all the architectures and default Debian version, you can run the following command:
```

```shell
make build push
```

To make and push the Docker images for all the architectures and Debian 10, you can run the following command:

```shell
make -C go -f Makefile.debian10 build push
```

Finally, to build a single Docker image for `arm` architecture and Debian 10, you can run the following command:

```shell
make -C go -f Makefile.debian10 build push IMAGES=arm
```

## Multiarch Docker images

> Some of the Docker images are build for the amd64 and arm64 architectures, this allow to run the Docker images in linux/amd64, linux/arm64, darwin/amd64, and darwin/arm64. This is done using the `.ci/scripts/buildx.sh` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the Docker images are built for the amd64 and arm64 architectures, this allow to run the Docker images in linux/amd64, linux/arm64, darwin/amd64, and darwin/arm64. This is done using the `.ci/scripts/buildx.sh` command.
```

To choose if build a Docker image for amd64 and arm64 or only for amd64, The Makefiles check fot the value o `BUILDX` and `DOCKER_MULTIARCH` variables. In the target Makefile the `DOCKER_COMMAND` is replaced with the `.ci/scripts/buildx.sh` command.

```make
ifeq ($(DOCKER_MULTIARCH),1)
DOCKER_CMD := $(SELF_DIR)/../.ci/scripts/buildx.sh
endif
```

## Docker images dependencies

The Docker images depends on each other, so there is an order to build them.
The are two Docker images that are parent of all the other images, the `fpm` and the `go/llvm-apple`.

> Anytime a new Devian version is released, the `fpm` and `go/llvm-apple` image needs to be updated to use the new Debian version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anytime a new Debian version is released, the `fpm` and `go/llvm-apple` image needs to be updated to use the new Debian version.
```

The following diagram shows the dependencies between the Docker images.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Debian
    Debian --> fpm
    Debian --> base
    Debian --> base_arm
    Debian --> llvm_apple
    llvm_apple --> darwing_arm64
    base --> arm
    base --> armel
    base --> armhf
    base --> main
    base --> darwin
    base --> darwing_arm64
    base --> mips
    base --> mips32
    base --> npcap
    base --> ppc
    base --> s390x
```

## Releasing images for a new Go version

> With every new version of `go` we made a new branch with the name of the previous version to allow continue building the Docker images for the previous version of `go`. So if we are in go `1.17` and go `1.18` is released, we create a new branch `1.17`, the we update the `master` branch to install go `1.18`. Due to the changes in the Debian packages repositories, there is no guaranties that the Docker images for the previous version of `go` will continue to work after some time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With every new version of `go` we made a new branch with the name of the previous version to allow continue building the Docker images for the previous version of `go`. So if we are in go `1.19` and go `1.20` is released, we create a new branch `1.19`, the we update the `main` branch to install go `1.20`. Due to the changes in the Debian packages repositories, there is no guaranties that the Docker images for the previous version of `go` will continue to work after some time.
```
